# My Analysis of Searle's Chinese Room

Searle's Chinese room is an uncomfortable thought experiment to computationalists, and one I think gets unfairly brushed aside by them. The arguments often end away with saying "the system" is the consciousness, or that it's flawed in some way. Searle does a well enough job of replying to each of them.

They tend to overcomplicate the beautiful simplicity of the thought experiment. The idea is not that the homunculus, or the person inside the room doing the calculations is conscious, the problem is that he *he doesn't understand* what he's doing when he's calculating. It has nothing to with consciousness, it has everything to do with semantics and meaning.

Its implications being that a CPU executing calculations alone is not enough to explain understanding.

It's pretty cut and dry for me, and it stands as a useful test for determining whether an artificial intelligence understands, or it's just hardware doing calculations. It's far more rigurous and contemporary than a behaviourist test, like the turing test. 

I think the issue is that for computationalists, it gives some misplaced fear that it challenges their theory of mind. Connectionism, while not close to explaining how the brain works as they like it to be (take it we're still deciding how neurons even code information), has proved terribly effective in illustrating some measure of intelligence.

## The Trouble of Rationality and Problem-solving

Hume's is-ought problem. We can problem solve, but it doesn't provide us a reason to problem solve. i.e. problem solving alone is ambiguous, and holds no candle to consciousness nor understanding problem solving is ambiguous, and our inability to solve a problem does not detract from our ability to eventually understand.

Searle points out rather preccientally that a computer which solves a problem through syntax alone cannot understand what they're doing. 

> Does problem-solving alone solve 
> Does our intuition require self-perception, and will?

## Parallelization: A (false) messiah?
